Doc for logging generator (#24057)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/extensions/logger-message-generator.md

```csharp
class MyLogWrapper
{
    private readonly ILogger _logger;

    public MyLogWrapper(ILogger logger)
    {
        _logger = logger;
    }

    [LoggerMessage(EventId = 0, Level = LogLevel.Critical, Message = "Could not open socket to `{hostName}`")]
    public partial void CouldNotOpenSocket(string hostName);
}

```

Sometimes, the logging level needs to be a dynamic property rather than being statically built into the code. You can do this by omitting the logging level from the attribute and instead supplying it as an argument to the logging method:

```csharp
static partial class Log
{
    [LoggerMessage(EventId = 0, Message = "Could not open socket to `{hostName}`")]
    public static partial void CouldNotOpenSocket(ILogger logger, LogLevel level, string hostName);
}
```

You can omit the logging message and an empty string will be provided for the message but the state will contain the arguments and formats them as key value pairs.

```csharp
using Microsoft.Extensions.Logging;
using System.Text.Json;

namespace LoggingGeneratorSampleApp
{
    class Program
    {

>         static void Main(string[] args)

Reviewer: Should C#'s top level statements be used here?
To reduce the noise and make the sample more concise?

Reviewer 2: Done

        {
            var logger = LoggerFactory.Create(builder =>
            {
                builder.AddJsonConsole(o => 
                o.JsonWriterOptions = new JsonWriterOptions()
                {
                    Indented = true
                });
            }).CreateLogger<Program>();

            logger.LogMethod(LogLevel.Information, "Liana", "California");
        }
    }

    public static partial class MyPoco
    {
        [LoggerMessage(EventId = 23)]
        public static partial void LogMethod(this ILogger logger, LogLevel logLevel, string name, string state);
    }
}
```

Outputs:
```
{
  "EventId": 23,
  "LogLevel": "Information",
  "Category": "ConsoleApp66.Program",
  "Message": "",
  "State": {
    "Message": "",
    "name": "Liana",
    "state": "California",
    "{OriginalFormat}": ""
  }
}
```

## Requirements

Logging methods have some constraints which must be followed:

- Logging methods must be static, partial, and return void.
- Logging method names must not start with an underscore.
- Parameter names of logging methods must not start with an underscore.

> - Logging methods may not be defined in nested type.

Reviewer: If https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/52301 should be addressed, this may be no longer true.

- Logging methods cannot be generic.

> Also, the code generation model depends on code being compiled with a modern C# compiler, version 9 or later. The C# 9.0 compiler became available with .NET Core 3.1. To upgrade to a modern C# compiler, edit your project file and add:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, the code generation model depends on code being compiled with a modern C# compiler, version 9 or later. The C# 9.0 compiler became available with .NET 5.0. To upgrade to a modern C# compiler, edit your project file and add:
```
?

```csharp
public partial class LoggingSample6
{
    private readonly ILogger _logger;

    public LoggingSample6(ILogger logger)
    {
        _logger = logger;
    }

    [LoggerMessage(EventId = 10, Level = LogLevel.Information, Message = "Welcome to {City} {Province}!")]
    public partial void LogMethodSupportsPascalCasingOfNames(string city, string province);

    public void TestLogging()
    {
        LogMethodSupportsPascalCasingOfNames("Vancouver", "BC");
    }
}
```

Json console output (notice the log arguments become uppercase):
```
{
  "EventId": 13,
  "LogLevel": "Information",
  "Category": "LoggingExample",
  "Message": "Welcome to Vancouver BC!",
  "State": {
    "Message": "Welcome to Vancouver BC!",
    "City": "Vancouver",
    "Province": "BC",
    "{OriginalFormat}": "Welcome to {city} {province}!"
  }
}
```
### Order of arguments do not matter

There is no constraint in the ordering at this point. So the user could define `ILogger` as the last argument for example:
```csharp
[LoggerMessage(EventId = 110, Level = LogLevel.Debug, Message = "M1 {ex3} {ex2}")]

> static partial void LogMethod(System.Exception ex, System.Exception ex2, System.Exception ex3, ILogger logger);

Reviewer: Will the generator here log `ex3 ex2` or `ex2 ex3`?
In LoggerMessage.Define only the position of the placeholder is used, not the name of the placeholder. So my question is: does the logger generator use the name of the placeholder?

If not this example should be changed or a sentence added about the behavior.
It may be astonishing to some users otherwise.

Author: thanks for the note.

Reviewer 2: Good question @gfoidl

@maryamariyan and I tested this out, it is non-ordinal based - and matches the parameter names to the template placeholders. I'm adding details about this to the article.

  "Message": "Welcome to Vancouver BC!",
  "State": {
    "Message": "Welcome to Vancouver BC!",
    "city": "Vancouver",
    "province": "BC",
    "{OriginalFormat}": "Welcome to {city} {province}!"
  }
}
{
  "EventId": 20,
  "LogLevel": "Critical",
  "Category": "LoggingExample",
  "Message": "Value is 1.234568E+004",
  "State": {
    "Message": "Value is 1.234568E+004",
    "value": 12345.6789,
    "{OriginalFormat}": "Value is {value:E}"
  }
}
```

### Benefits with the source generator approach:

- Allows the logging structure to be preserved and enables the exact format syntax required by https://messagetemplates.org/
- Allows supplying alternative names for the holes and using format specifiers.
- Allows to pass all of original data as-is without any complication around how it's stored prior to something being done with it other than creating a string.
- Provides logging-specific diagnostics, e.g. it emits warnings for duplicate event ids.

#### Benefits compared to using LoggerMessage.Define directly

- Shorter and simpler syntax than current approach
- Guided developer experience - the generator gives warnings to help developers do the right thing

> - Support for an arbitrary # of logging parameters. current approach tops out at 6

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Support for an arbitrary # of logging parameters. LoggerMessage.Define tops out at 6
```
? "Current appraoch" can also be `ILogger.Log`, though I see the header about LoggerMessage.Define, but be explicit.

Other bullets in this section too.

- Support for dynamic log level, current approach doesn't support this

### Known issues/limitations

The first version of the generator uses `LoggerMessage.Define` under the hood where possible. The issues below track potential improvements to make on `Define` APIs to allow better support in the source generator.

- _Support for an arbitrary # of logging parameters and dynamic logging_

Currently maximum number of parameters allowed via `LoggerMessage.Define` (Refer to [dotnet/runtime#50913](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/50913)) is 6. To mitigate this either the source generator would need to fallback to another approach, or we would need to add more `Define` overloads for the generator to use. The issue also tracks adding APIs to allow `Define` with supporting dynamic logging as well.

- _More robust support for handling message template parameters._

> The code generation using `LoggerMessage.Define` does not currently handle message templates when number of parameters do not match the specified template parameters even if the parameters used in the template are the same (Refer to [dotnet/runtime#51054](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/51054])). This could be something that the source generator supports as it evolves further.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code generation using `LoggerMessage.Define` does not currently handle message templates when number of parameters do not match the specified template parameters even if the parameters used in the template are the same (Refer to [dotnet/runtime#51054](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/51054)). This could be something that the source generator supports as it evolves further.
```
In the link-address a `]` too much.

ms.author: maariyan
ms.date: 05/06/2021
---

# Compile-time logging source generation

> [!NOTE]
> The APIs in this article are new. They'll be generally available as part of .NET 6, but are subject to change.
>
> - When using .NET 6 Preview 4, it's part of the [Microsoft.Extensions.Logging](https://www.nuget.org/packages/microsoft.extensions.logging) package.
> - When using [.NET nightly builds](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/docs/project/dogfooding.md), it's part of the [Microsoft.Extensions.Logging.Abstractions](https://www.nuget.org/packages/microsoft.extensions.logging.abstractions) package.

With .NET 6, the `LoggerMessageAttribute` was introduced. This attribute is part of the `Microsoft.Extensions.Logging` namespace, and when used it will source generate performant logging APIs. The source generation logging support is designed to deliver a highly-usable and highly-performant logging solution for modern .NET applications. The auto-generated source code relies on the <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.Logging.ILogger> interface in conjunction with <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.Logging.LoggerMessage.Define%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType> functionality.

> The source generator is triggered when `LoggerMessageAttribute` is used on `partial` logging methods. When triggered, it is either able to autogenerate the implementation of the `partial` methods it's decorating, or produce compile-time diagnostics with hints about proper usage. The compile-time logging solution is typically considerably faster at runtime than existing logging approaches. It does this by eliminating boxing, temporary allocations, and copies to the maximum extent possible.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The source generator is triggered when `LoggerMessageAttribute` is used on `partial` logging methods. When triggered, it is either able to autogenerate the implementation of the `partial` methods it's decorating, or produce compile-time diagnostics with hints about proper usage. The compile-time logging solution is typically considerably faster at run time than existing logging approaches. It achieves this by eliminating boxing, temporary allocations, and copies to the maximum extent possible.
```

## Basic usage

> To use the `LoggerMessageAttribute`, the consuming class and method need to be `partial`. The code generator is triggered at compile-time, and generates an implementation of the `partial` method.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To use the `LoggerMessageAttribute`, the consuming class and method need to be `partial`. The code generator is triggered at compile time, and generates an implementation of the `partial` method.
```

```csharp
public partial class InstanceLoggingExample
{
    private readonly ILogger _logger;

    public InstanceLoggingExample(ILogger logger)
    {
        _logger = logger;
    }

    [LoggerMessage(
        EventId = 0,
        Level = LogLevel.Critical,
        Message = "Could not open socket to `{hostName}`")]
    public partial void CouldNotOpenSocket(string hostName);
}
```

Sometimes, the log level needs to be dynamic rather than statically built into the code. You can do this by omitting the log level from the attribute and instead requiring it as a parameter to the logging method.

```csharp
public static partial class Log
{
    [LoggerMessage(
        EventId = 0,
        Message = "Could not open socket to `{hostName}`")]
    public static partial void CouldNotOpenSocket(
        ILogger logger,
        LogLevel level, /* Dynamic log level as parameter, rather than defined in attribute. */
        string hostName);
}
```

> You can omit the logging message and <xref:System.String.Empty?displayProperty=nameWithType> will be provided for the message. The state will contain the arguments, and is formatted as key value pairs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can omit the logging message and <xref:System.String.Empty?displayProperty=nameWithType> will be provided for the message. The state will contain the arguments, formatted as key-value pairs.
```

```csharp
using System.Text.Json;
using Microsoft.Extensions.Logging;

ILogger<SampleObject> logger = LoggerFactory.Create(
    builder =>
    builder.AddJsonConsole(
        options =>
        options.JsonWriterOptions = new JsonWriterOptions()
        {
            Indented = true
        }))
    .CreateLogger<SampleObject>();

logger.CustomLogEvent(LogLevel.Information, "Liana", "California");

public static partial class SampleObject
{
    [LoggerMessage(EventId = 23)]
    public static partial void CustomLogEvent(
        this ILogger logger, LogLevel logLevel,
        string name, string state);
}
```

Consider the example logging output when using the `JsonConsole` formatter.

```json
{
  "EventId": 23,
  "LogLevel": "Information",
  "Category": "ConsoleApp.SampleObject",
  "Message": "",
  "State": {
    "Message": "",
    "name": "Liana",
    "state": "California",
    "{OriginalFormat}": ""
  }
}
```

## Log method constraints

> When using the `LoggerMessageAttribute` on logging methods, there are some constraints which must be followed:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When using the `LoggerMessageAttribute` on logging methods, there are some constraints that must be followed:
```

- Logging methods must be `static`, `partial`, and return `void`.
- Logging method names must *not* start with an underscore.
- Parameter names of logging methods must *not* start with an underscore.

> - Logging methods may *not* be defined in nested type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Logging methods may *not* be defined in a nested type.
```

- Logging methods *cannot* be generic.

> The code generation model depends on code being compiled with a modern C# compiler, version 9 or later. The C# 9.0 compiler became available with .NET 5.0. To upgrade to a modern C# compiler, edit your project file to target C# 9.0.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The code-generation model depends on code being compiled with a modern C# compiler, version 9 or later. The C# 9.0 compiler became available with .NET 5. To upgrade to a modern C# compiler, edit your project file to target C# 9.0.
```

```csharp
public interface ILogger
{
    void Log<TState>(
        Microsoft.Extensions.Logging.LogLevel logLevel,
        Microsoft.Extensions.Logging.EventId eventId,
        TState state,
        System.Exception? exception,
        Func<TState, System.Exception?, string> formatter);
}
```

As a general rule, the first instance of `ILogger`, `LogLevel`, and `Exception` are treated specially in the log method signature of the source generator. Subsequent instances are treated like normal parameters to the message template:

```csharp
// This is a valid attribute usage
[LoggerMessage(
    EventId = 110, Level = LogLevel.Debug, Message = "M1 {ex3} {ex2}")]
public static partial void ValidLogMethod(
    ILogger logger,
    Exception ex,
    Exception ex2,
    Exception ex3);

// This causes a warning
[LoggerMessage(
    EventId = 0, Level = LogLevel.Debug, Message = "M1 {ex} {ex2}")]
public static partial void WarningLogMethod(
    ILogger logger,
    Exception ex,
    Exception ex2);
```

> [!IMPORTANT]

> > The warnings emitted provide details as to the correct usage of the `LoggerMessageAttribute`. In the preceding example the `WarningLogMethod` will report a `DiagnosticSeverity.Warning` of `SYSLIB0025`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> The warnings emitted provide details as to the correct usage of the `LoggerMessageAttribute`. In the preceding example, the `WarningLogMethod` will report a `DiagnosticSeverity.Warning` of `SYSLIB0025`.
```

>
> ```console
> Don't include a template for ex in the logging message since it is implicitly taken care of.
> ```

### Case-insensitive template name support

> The generator uses case-insensitive comparison between parameters in the message template and log message argument names so when the ILogger enumerates the state, the argument will be picked up by message template, which can make the logs nicer to consume:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The generator uses case-insensitive comparison between parameters in the message template and log-message parameter names. This means that when the `ILogger` enumerates the state, the argument is picked up by message template, which can make the logs nicer to consume:
```

    {
        _logger = logger;
    }

    [LoggerMessage(
        EventId = 10,
        Level = LogLevel.Information,
        Message = "Welcome to {City} {Province}!")]
    public partial void LogMethodSupportsPascalCasingOfNames(
        string city, string province);

    public void TestLogging()
    {
        LogMethodSupportsPascalCasingOfNames("Vancouver", "BC");
    }
}
```

Consider the example logging output when using the `JsonConsole` formatter.

```json
{
  "EventId": 13,
  "LogLevel": "Information",
  "Category": "LoggingExample",
  "Message": "Welcome to Vancouver BC!",
  "State": {
    "Message": "Welcome to Vancouver BC!",
    "City": "Vancouver",
    "Province": "BC",
    "{OriginalFormat}": "Welcome to {City} {Province}!"
  }
}
```

### Indeterminate parameter order

There are no constraints on the ordering of log method parameters. A developer could define the `ILogger` as the last parameter, although it may a appear a bit awkward.

```csharp
[LoggerMessage(
    EventId = 110,
    Level = LogLevel.Debug,
    Message = "M1 {ex3} {ex2}")]
static partial void LogMethod(
    Exception ex,
    Exception ex2,
    Exception ex3,

>     ILogger logger); // 😲

Reviewer 3: I've never seen an emoji used in docs before. Style guide seems to say we shouldn't use them? https://styleguides.azurewebsites.net/Styleguide/Read?id=2700&topicid=33677

Author: ```suggestion
    ILogger logger);
```

```

> [!TIP]

> > The order of the parameters on a log method are *not* required to correspond to the order of the template placeholders. Instead, the placeholder names in the template are expected to match the parameters. Consider the following `JsonConsole` output and the order of the errors.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> The order of the parameters on a log method is *not* required to correspond to the order of the template placeholders. Instead, the placeholder names in the template are expected to match the parameters. Consider the following `JsonConsole` output and the order of the errors.
```

>
> ```json
> {
>   "EventId": 110,
>   "LogLevel": "Debug",
>   "Category": "ConsoleApp.Program",
>   "Message": "M1 System.Exception: Third time's the charm. System.Exception: This is the second error.",
>   "State": {
>     "Message": "M1 System.Exception: Third time's the charm. System.Exception: This is the second error.",
>     "ex2": "System.Exception: This is the second error.",
>     "ex3": "System.Exception: Third time's the charm.",
>     "{OriginalFormat}": "M1 {ex3} {ex2}"
>   }
> }
> ```

## Additional logging examples

> The samples below show how-to:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The samples below show how to:
```

> - `LogWithCustomEventName`: retrieve event name via `LoggerMessage` attribute.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `LogWithCustomEventName`: Retrieve event name via `LoggerMessage` attribute.
```

> - `LogWithDynamicLogLevel`: set log level dynamically, to allow log level to be set based on configuration input.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `LogWithDynamicLogLevel`: Set log level dynamically, to allow log level to be set based on configuration input.
```

> - `UsingFormatSpecifier`: use format specifiers to format logging parameters.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `UsingFormatSpecifier`: Use format specifiers to format logging parameters.
```

      Welcome to Vancouver BC!
crit: LoggingExample[20]
      Value is 1.234568E+004
```

Consider the example logging output when using the `JsonConsole` formatter.

```json
{
  "EventId": 9,
  "LogLevel": "Trace",
  "Category": "LoggingExample",
  "Message": "Fixed message",
  "State": {
    "Message": "Fixed message",
    "{OriginalFormat}": "Fixed message"
  }
}
{
  "EventId": 10,
  "LogLevel": "Warning",
  "Category": "LoggingExample",
  "Message": "Welcome to Vancouver BC!",
  "State": {
    "Message": "Welcome to Vancouver BC!",
    "city": "Vancouver",
    "province": "BC",
    "{OriginalFormat}": "Welcome to {city} {province}!"
  }
}
{
  "EventId": 10,
  "LogLevel": "Information",
  "Category": "LoggingExample",
  "Message": "Welcome to Vancouver BC!",
  "State": {
    "Message": "Welcome to Vancouver BC!",
    "city": "Vancouver",
    "province": "BC",
    "{OriginalFormat}": "Welcome to {city} {province}!"
  }
}
{
  "EventId": 20,
  "LogLevel": "Critical",
  "Category": "LoggingExample",
  "Message": "Value is 1.234568E+004",
  "State": {
    "Message": "Value is 1.234568E+004",
    "value": 12345.6789,
    "{OriginalFormat}": "Value is {value:E}"
  }
}
```

## Summary

> With the advent of C# source generators, writing highly-performant logging APIs is much easier. Using the source generator approach has several key benefits:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With the advent of C# source generators, writing highly performant logging APIs is much easier. Using the source generator approach has several key benefits:
```

- Allows the logging structure to be preserved and enables the exact format syntax required by [Message Templates](https://messagetemplates.org).
- Allows supplying alternative names for the template placeholders and using format specifiers.
- Allows the passing of all original data as-is, without any complication around how it's stored prior to something being done with it (other than creating a `string`).

> - Provides logging-specific diagnostics, emits warnings for duplicate event ids.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Provides logging-specific diagnostics, emits warnings for duplicate event IDs.
```

Additionally, there are benefits over manually using <xref:Microsoft.Extensions.Logging.LoggerMessage.Define%2A?displayProperty=nameWithType>:

> - Shorter and simpler syntax, declarative attribute usage rather than coding boilerplate.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Shorter and simpler syntax: Declarative attribute usage rather than coding boilerplate.
```

> - Guided developer experience, the generator gives warnings to help developers do the right thing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Guided developer experience: The generator gives warnings to help developers do the right thing.
```

> - Support for an arbitrary number of logging parameters. `LoggerMessage.Define` supports a max of six.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Support for an arbitrary number of logging parameters. `LoggerMessage.Define` supports a maximum of six.
```

> - Support for dynamic log level, this is not possible with `LoggerMessage.Define` alone.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Support for dynamic log level. This is not possible with `LoggerMessage.Define` alone.
```

### Known limitations

> There are a few known limitations with the underlying implementation details. The first version of the generator uses `LoggerMessage.Define` where possible. The following issues are tracking potential improvements to the `Define` APIs, which could allow for better support of the source generator.

Reviewer 3: We aren't supposed to discuss potential future functionality in docs.
See https://review.docs.microsoft.com/en-us/help/contribute/contribute-get-started-channel-guidance?branch=master#unauthorized-content.
